Update LIP 0052 with genesis block processing (#123)
LiskHQ/lips: proposals/lip-0052.md

                "required": ["collection", "nextAvailableIndex"],
                "properties": {
                    "collection": {
                        "dataType": "uint32",
                        "fieldNumber": 1
                    },
                    "nextAvailableIndex": {
                        "dataType": "uint64",
                        "fieldNumber": 2
                    }
                }
            }
        },
        "availableCollectionSubstore": {
            "dataType": "uint32",
            "fieldNumber": 3
        },
        "terminatedEscrowSubstore": {
            "type": "array",
            "fieldNumber": 4,
            "items": {
                "type": "uint32"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

#### Genesis State Initialization

During the genesis state initialization stage, the following steps are executed. If any step fails, the block is discarded and has no further effect.

Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the `data` bytes included in the block assets for the NFT module and let `genesisBlockAssetObject` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisNFTStoreSchema` schema, given above.

> * Initial checks:

Reviewer: Same comments as for the Token module:

I would find it easier for manual validation by a user as well as programmatic validation of the token module if for an array of key-value pairs we always have that the array elements are sorted lexicographically by key.

Author: OK, added the requirement here also.

Reviewer: I am a bit confused by the changes as they are specified for the collection substore, but seem to refer to the NFT substore. What I meant above:

- `NFT substore`: order by NFT ID or, which may be more convenient, by address and then NFT ID (this would be the key order in the user substore)
- `collectionSubstore`: order by collection
- `terminatedEscrowSubstore`: order the array entries

  ```
  Further, if `NFTEntry.owner` has length 20, create an entry in the user substore with
  ```python
  storeKey = NFTEntry.owner || uint32be(NFTEntry.NFTID.chainID) || uint32be(NFTEntry.NFTID.collection) || uint64be(NFTEntry.NFTID.index)
  storeValue = {"exists": True} serialized using userStoreSchema.
  ```

* For each entry `collectionEntry` in `genesisBlockAssetObject.collectionSubstore`, create an entry in the collection substore  with
  ```python
  storeKey = uint32be(collectionEntry.collection)
  storeValue = {"nextAvailableIndex": collectionEntry.nextAvailableIndex} serialized using collectionStoreSchema.
  ```

* Create an entry in the available collection substore with
  ```python
  storeKey = EMPTY_BYTES
  storeValue = {"nextAvailableCollection": genesisBlockAssetObject.availableCollectionSubstore} 
               serialized using availableCollectionStoreSchema.
  ```

* For each entry `terminatedChainID` in `genesisBlockAssetObject.terminatedEscrowSubstore`, create an entry in the terminated escrow substore with
  ```python
  storeKey = uint32be(terminatedChainID)
  storeValue = {"escrowTerminated": True} serialized using terminatedEscrowStoreSchema.
  ```
  

> Once the module store is initialized, its validity is attested asserting that the function below returns `True`.

Reviewer 2: I was wondering, shouldn't this function execution be better placed in the *Genesis state finalization* processing step of the genesis block? This way we make sure this step is  always done after the others without creating inconsistencies. Also, we  would have a clear distinction between general checks and state initialization versos inter substore (although intramodule) validation. T

Author: No very strong opinion on that, I understood that we do all "internal" checks during the initialization step and keep the finalization step for cross-module API calls (or verifications).
Also the sentence above the code snippet states that this state validation must be done after the module store is created.

Reviewer 2: I think that idea of intra vs inter module checks can be flexible and in [the genesis block LIP](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/38458a4c0ac3c24ab517ad6ffb069b102137fc44/proposals/lip-update_genesis_block_schema_and_processing.md) this definition is relatively blurry on purpose. And this NFT module with its peculiar state store complexity may be suitable for such genesis processing.

Again, it is just a small consideration and as you said, the current specs are correct as they are. Also @janhack or @mitsuaki-u  may have better or stronger arguments one way or the other.

Reviewer: I would keep it as is. I think it is best to do the check as early as possible as we ensure this way that after the genesis state initialization the NFT module state is correct and consistent.

Author: Will keep as is then.

Reviewer: Can be resolved from my side.

```python
NFTStoreValid():
    existingIndex = {}
    for storeKey a store key in NFT substore:
        chainID = storeKey[0:4] # part of the key corresponding to the chain ID of the NFT
        collection = storeKey[4:8] # part of the key corresponding to the collection of the NFT
        index = storeKey[8:12] # part of the key corresponding to the index of the NFT
        if chainID == CHAIN_ID_ALIAS_NATIVE:
            existingIndex[collection] = max{existingIndex[collection], index}
    
    # check that all existing indices are smaller than the next available index for the collection
    for collection in existingIndex:

>         if collectionStore(collection).nextAvailableIndex <= existingIndex[collection]:

Reviewer: Shouldn't we also check first if collectionStore has an entry with key `collection`?

Author: sure

                    "collection": {
                        "dataType": "uint32",
                        "fieldNumber": 1
                    },
                    "nextAvailableIndex": {
                        "dataType": "uint64",
                        "fieldNumber": 2
                    }
                }
            }
        },
        "availableCollectionSubstore": {
            "dataType": "uint32",
            "fieldNumber": 3
        },
        "terminatedEscrowSubstore": {
            "type": "array",
            "fieldNumber": 4,
            "items": {
                "type": "uint32"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

#### Genesis State Initialization

During the genesis state initialization stage, the following steps are executed. If any step fails, the block is discarded and has no further effect.

Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the `data` bytes included in the block assets for the NFT module and let `genesisBlockAssetObject` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisNFTStoreSchema` schema, given above.

* Initial checks:
   * Across all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, all values given for `NTFID` must be unique. 

>    * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, values given for `chainID` must have either length 20 (representing a user address) or 4 (representing a chain ID).

Author: that was a mistake. The user address should be store in `owner`. Thanks

   * The `NFTSubstore` must be in lexicographical order of `owner`. 
      * For a given `owner`, the entries must be in ascending order of `tokenID.chainID`. 
      * For a given `owner` and `tokenID.chainID`, the entries must be in ascending order of `tokenID.collection`. 
      * For a given `owner`, `tokenID.chainID` and `tokenID.collection` the entries must be in ascending order of `tokenID.index`.
   * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, if the value of `owner` has length 4 (representing an escrowed NFT) then the corresponding `NFTID.chainID` must equal `CHAIN_ID_ALIAS_NATIVE`.
   * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, if the value of `attributes` must have length less than or equal to `MAX_BYTE_LENGTH_ATTRIBUTES`.
   * Accross all element of the `collectionSubstore` array, all values given for `collection` must be unique.
   * The `collectionSubstore` array must be in ascending order of `collection`.

>    * The `terminatedEscrowSubstore` array must be in ascending order. 

Reviewer: I guess for `terminatedEscrowSubstore` we should also require uniqueness (although the state would be the same).

Author: I don't understand what you mean here.

   * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, values given for `chainID` must have either length 20 (representing a user address) or 4 (representing a chain ID).
   * The `NFTSubstore` must be in lexicographical order of `owner`. 
      * For a given `owner`, the entries must be in ascending order of `tokenID.chainID`. 
      * For a given `owner` and `tokenID.chainID`, the entries must be in ascending order of `tokenID.collection`. 
      * For a given `owner`, `tokenID.chainID` and `tokenID.collection` the entries must be in ascending order of `tokenID.index`.
   * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, if the value of `owner` has length 4 (representing an escrowed NFT) then the corresponding `NFTID.chainID` must equal `CHAIN_ID_ALIAS_NATIVE`.
   * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, if the value of `attributes` must have length less than or equal to `MAX_BYTE_LENGTH_ATTRIBUTES`.
   * Accross all element of the `collectionSubstore` array, all values given for `collection` must be unique.
   * The `collectionSubstore` array must be in ascending order of `collection`.
   * The `terminatedEscrowSubstore` array must be in ascending order. 

>    * 

Reviewer 2: remove this asterisk

        createUserEntry(senderAddress, nftID)
```

> ### Genesis Block Processing

Reviewer 2: There is a previous specs section "NFTs in Genesis Blocks" contradicting points of this section.

Author: indeed, forgot to remove it, gone.

#### Genesis Assets Schema

```java
genesisNFTStoreSchema = {
    "type": "object",
    "required": [
        "NFTSubstore",
        "collectionSubstore",
        "availableLocalIDSubstore",
        "terminatedEscrowSubstore"
    ],
    "properties": {
        "NFTSubstore": {
            "type": "array",
            "fieldNumber": 1,
            "items": {
                "type": "object",
                "required": ["owner", "lockingModuleID", "attributes"],
                "properties": {
                    "NFTID": {
                        "type": "object",

>                         "fieldNumber": 2,

Author: done

                        "properties": {
                            "chainID": {
                                "dataType": "uint32",
                                "fieldNumber": 1
                            },
                            "collection": {
                                "dataType": "uint32",
                                "fieldNumber": 2
                            },
                            "index": {
                                "dataType": "uint32",
                                "fieldNumber": 3
                            }
                        }
                    },
                    "owner": {
                        "dataType": "bytes",
                        "fieldNumber": 2
                    },
                    "lockingModuleID": {
                        "dataType": "uint32",
                        "fieldNumber": 3
                    },
                    "attributes": {
                        "dataType": "bytes",
                        "fieldNumber": 4
                    }
                }
            }
        },
        "collectionSubstore": {
            "type": "array",

>             "fieldNumber": 1,

Author: done

            "items": {
                "type": "object",
                "required": ["collection", "nextAvailableIndex"],
                "properties": {
                    "collection": {
                        "dataType": "uint32",
                        "fieldNumber": 1
                    },
                    "nextAvailableIndex": {
                        "dataType": "uint64",
                        "fieldNumber": 2
                    }
                }
            }
        },
        "availableCollectionSubstore": {
            "dataType": "uint32",

>             "fieldNumber": 1

Author: done

        },
        "terminatedEscrowSubstore": {
            "type": "array",

>             "fieldNumber": 1,

Author: done

            "items": {
                "type": "uint32"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

#### Genesis State Initialization

During the genesis state initialization stage, the following steps are executed. If any step fails, the block is discarded and has no further effect.

Let `genesisBlockAssetBytes` be the `data` bytes included in the block assets for the NFT module and let `genesisBlockAssetObject` be the deserialization of `genesisBlockAssetBytes` according to the `genesisNFTStoreSchema` schema, given above.

* Initial checks:
   * Accross all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, all values given for `NTFID` must be unique. 

>    * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, all values given for `chainID` must have length 20 (representing a user address) or 4 (representing a chain ID).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, values given for `chainID` must have either length 20 (representing a user address) or 4 (representing a chain ID).
```

   * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, if the value of `owner` has length 4 (representing an escrowed NFT) then the corresponding `NFTID.chainID` must equal `CHAIN_ID_ALIAS_NATIVE`.

>    * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, if the value of `attributes` has length less than or equal to `MAX_BYTE_LENGTH_ATTRIBUTES`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * For all elements of the `NFTSubstore` array, the value of `attributes` must have length less than or equal to `MAX_BYTE_LENGTH_ATTRIBUTES`.
```

Author: changed

>    * Accross all element of the `collectionSubstore` array, all values given for `collection` must be unique.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Across all element of the `collectionSubstore` array, all values given for `collection` must be unique.
```

Author: fixed

               serialized using availableCollectionStoreSchema.
  ```

* For each entry `terminatedChainID` in `genesisBlockAssetObject.terminatedEscrowSubstore`, create an entry in the terminated escrow substore with
  ```python
  storeKey = uint32be(terminatedChainID)
  storeValue = {"escrowTerminated": True} serialized using terminatedEscrowStoreSchema.
  ```
  
Once the module store is initialized, its validity is attested asserting that the function below returns `True`.
```python
NFTStoreValid():
    existingIndex = {}
    for storeKey a store key in NFT substore:
        chainID = storeKey[0:4] # part of the key corresponding to the chain ID of the NFT
        collection = storeKey[4:8] # part of the key corresponding to the collection of the NFT
        index = storeKey[8:12] # part of the key corresponding to the index of the NFT
        if chainID == CHAIN_ID_ALIAS_NATIVE:
            existingIndex[collection] = max{existingIndex[collection], index}
    
    # check that all existing indices are smaller than the next available index for the collection
    for collection in existingIndex:

>         nextAvailableIndex = store value of the collection substore entry with store key 'collection'

Reviewer 2: just to clarify, we are assigning the value stored in the property `nextAvailableIndex` of the collection substore to a property called `nextAvailableIndex` here?

Author: yes, it's a bit weird. Changed to use the already defined notation.

        if nextAvailableIndex <= existingIndex[collection]:
        return False
        
    # check that the largest existing collection is smaller than the recorded available collection
    maxCollection = max key of the existingIndex dictionary, -1 if existingIndex is empty

>     nextAvailableCollection = store value of the available collection substore

Reviewer 2: same clarification as in line 830.

Author: yes, added a comment on that one, and updated the wording.
